[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
We promised we
were going to come
back a year ago
and do the next interview
in this incredible library
of yours, and we made it.
>>BARBARA HAND CLOW:
We are, Regina.
And it's great.
>>REGINA: And you know what?
We had to do this because
it's a follow-up conversation.
Last time we spoke
about the "Alchemy
of Nine Dimensions,"
which has been wildly
popular with our viewers.
And for some reason,
we almost skipped
over the fourth dimension.
And I don't know how
and why that happened.
After the show we
said, what happened
to the fourth dimension?
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
And it's like the hardest
one to figure out.
>>REGINA: It's the
hardest one to figure out.
It's one directly related
to the Annunaki, right?
And so we decided we got to come
back and do this thing right.
So that's going to be our
conversation a little later on.
But first, we're going to talk
about a time-free transparent
world.
And just saying
those words, I think,
makes people feel
uplifted, right?
>>HAND CLOW: I
think that's true.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you're
saying it really
has to do with the
astrology of the times
and what it's leading
us to, profoundly
altering the Earth and
our experience on it.
So let's set it up
by way of astrology,
and then we'll start going
into the particulars.
>>HAND CLOW: OK.
Well, we have really
come to a point where
we're poised at a
level of huge change
because we went through
the end of the two dates
for the Mayan calendar,
2011 and 2012.
And then we also, right
after we ended the calendars,
then we had seven major squares
between Uranus and Pluto.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: Right.
And this is a really big
deal because Uranus and Pluto
were conjunct in the 1960s,
when all of the idealism
and all of the new
ideas that all of us
had been pursuing for so many
years, that's when it started.
And so when it comes
to the square position,
that's when it comes
to a crisis point.
And so we are in a huge
crisis right now regarding
the issues of idealism and
potential healthy society
and ecology, et cetera.
And so here we are.
We're really poised
at a difficult point.
And at this point in time,
what tends to happen is chaos
tends to overwhelm us.
And then add to that the entry
into the Age of Aquarius.
So it's not just astrology,
although, of course,
the great ages are
also astrology.
But we are really
at this point really
moving into Aquarius
really fast now, which
means that all of the
issues that we developed
during the Age of Pisces
are disintegrating
and falling apart,
especially the patriarchy.
>>REGINA: Well,
that's what I was
going to ask you about next,
and let's talk about that.
I mean, here we're sitting on
the precipice of an election
that I don't think
anybody in the US
is particularly proud of.
It's coming down to the
lesser-of-evil type of choices
again, which is--
that phenomena has been
increasing for a while.
Although I think there
was a lot of hope
around the 2008 election
initially with Obama--
hope, change, and all.
But It didn't happen.
And so what does that
set us up for now?
We have a political scene
with Trump and Clinton, two
unpopular characters overall.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
Well, one of the
reasons I'm really
interested in
time-free transparency
is the person who
created it, invented it,
is a philosopher
named Jean Gebser.
And so he has actually come
up with a philosophy of hope
that actually does explain
what's going on right now.
And so regarding
the US election,
I can assure you that it's
very helpful if you have
a long perspective right now.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: Because when we
come to this crisis point that
we're at at this point--
and we're really
in it heavily now,
and it's going to
be very intense
for probably 5, 10 years.
And what happens
at that point is
we literally go through a
mutation of our species,
which is a really
hard thing to imagine.
And so one of the things that's
exciting about Jean Gebser
is that he has described some
previous mutational processes.
And I find that when
I look at the changes
in previous periods, it gives
me a lot more perspective
on what's going on now.
>>REGINA: Do you care
to fill us in on some
of his glimpses of the past
and what this particular period
of time fomented?
>>HAND CLOW: Right.
Well, in his work--
I think we'll probably discuss
the changes that he describes.
But in my own work,
I really work heavily
with the changes
of the great ages.
And so in my current work,
which happens to be fiction,
I'm really working on the
end of the Age of Pisces
and the beginning of
the Age of Aquarius.
But the question is how
you understand that.
And I've found
personally that if we
look at the ending of
the age before Pisces,
which is the Age of Aries--
and this is like 100 BC.
And so there's all
these books behind us
that all go back to right
around 100 BC to like 200 AD.
Because if we understand how
the previous age changed,
then it's a little bit easier
to have a perspective now.
>>REGINA: OK, set
us up with that.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
And what happened
with that is we
know you could call it the
Messianic Age, in a sense.
But the Age of
Aries was actually
about the development
of warfare,
because Aries is a very
aggressive astrological sign
because it's ruled by Mars.
And so as we moved into the
Age of Pisces, unfortunately
a lot of the war and
aggression was not
transformed and transmuted
as it should have been.
And so what we did is we
went into the Age of Pisces
with all the warfare, and we
transformed it into warfare
for God.
>>REGINA: Yeah, war
in the name of God.
>>HAND CLOW: Yes.
We've had 2,000 years now
of war in the name of God.
And one of the things that's
really characteristic of these
mutational points-- this is
something that could really
help people, I think--
is that when you get to this
mutational point, the way
it feels is what's
really important.
And what finally happens is you
just can't stand it anymore.
And I'm really seeing this
with the wars for gods.
I'm seeing Islamic
people, Christian people,
Jewish people are really
just disgusted because it's
absolutely not worth it.
And so this particular
age change into Aquarius
is a rather difficult
one because things
aborted 2,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: Well, I
don't think that anyone
would argue with you that the
feeling of just being fed up
seems to be
multi-generational now.
I hear my father, who is
classically quite conservative,
talking about the
times, and he can't
believe in his own
old-fashioned values anymore.
There's nothing
to represent that.
And then you go through
to the Millennials
who seem totally at a loss
as to what to do next.
>>HAND CLOW: I agree.
And so then you
could look at Trump
from a positive point
of view in this way.
I have a feeling he's
a steaming tea kettle.
I think he's blowing off steam
for people who are frustrated,
who don't have a
voice and all that.
But at the same time,
you have to start
to have some understanding
about what's happening.
Because there's a
tremendous amount of energy,
emotional energy and
intellectual energy,
that needs to be
released at this time
because we've been
living according
to very, very false
paradigms, and we just
can't stand it anymore.
>>REGINA: No, we can't.
So what do you see this as--
just going off topic just a tad
bit--
how do you see this expressing
itself in the Millennials
compared to the generation
of the '60s that
were presented with this?
>>HAND CLOW: I think the
Millennials, first of all,
are in the process of decoding
a lot of the false story.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: And I've
enjoyed doing that with them,
because I'm a teacher
for a lot of them.
And then secondly,
I think they're
doing a very, very good
job of ignoring the BS.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: Because,
for instance,
people our age,
as hard as we try,
the minute you put in one of
those mind-control programs,
we have a tendency
just to listen to it.
These kids aren't
listening to it at all.
And then furthermore,
probably more significantly,
is they are showing more signs
of the mutational stages that
were described by
Jean Gebser, and this
is the issue of the
time-free transparent world.
And so one of the reasons
I moved into this concept
of time-free
transparency is because--
back to "Alchemy
of Nine Dimensions"
and our other interviews
and one coming up--
I've struggled to-- even though
I understand this whole system
intellectually, I've
struggled to figure out,
how do I feel it?
How can I intuit it?
How do I know it?
And I found with
Jean Gebser's work
that-- now, he wrote
way back in the 1950s.
>>REGINA: That was the
"Ever-Present Origin"?
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
"Ever-Present Origin" was
published in 1953 in English.
And so what's amazing about
him is that he has really
come up with a description.
I think the alchemy description
is a fantastic description.
>>REGINA: Can you
give us his-- yeah,
his description or definition
of what a time-free transparent
world is?
>>HAND CLOW: Well,
and one of the reasons
I really went for his
work is that I had already
done all of the research
that he had done.
It's just that I hadn't
connected with him.
So in my case, first of all, I
did 100 sessions under hypnosis
into my past lives.
And as a result of
doing those sessions,
I time traveled over 100,000
years of human consciousness.
And that's in the
"Mind Chronicles"
trilogy, that story.
But it turns out that
100,000 years is the time
phase of the Paleolithic world.
And the Paleolithic world
was an incredible time
for human consciousness because
that's when we became artistic,
and that's when we started to
express ourselves with symbols.
But the reason it was
such a fantastic time
in our historical
experience was because we
were fused with nature.
If we go back into
the Paleolithic mind,
we were not separate
from nature.
We didn't think of ourselves
as an individual human
in relationship to nature.
And when you start to
contemplate that very deeply,
it gives you a tremendous
sense of fulfillment
and a tremendous
sense of security.
So back to the
Millennials, I think
that's why they're
tattooing themselves.
They're using nose rings.
They're going back
into some of the ways
that people used
to mark themselves
50,000 to 100,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: I was reading
something about that,
that certain of the
tattoos were actually
in geometric
configurations that had
to do, for example, with
healing technologies and such,
which that part of the art may
be lost to today's Millennials,
but may be subconsciously
re-emerging, right?
>>HAND CLOW: Oh,
it is re-emerging.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>HAND CLOW: And that's
what I'm saying, is
what I'm seeing, back
to the Millennials--
because what's important to me
is I'm a mom and a grandmother
and all that, and I care
about that generation.
And so the more
that they're going
to be able to understand
what's coming through them,
the easier it's
going to be for them.
Because you could say
that people of that age
will be the ones who will
birth the new hologram.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: You and I
will probably just enjoy
having things being a lot
freer and more artistic
than they have been.
But that generation
is going to live it.
>>REGINA: It makes
sense, because we really
left them no functional
institutions or structures
to work with anyway.
So they're going to have to
recreate from the ground up.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah, yeah.
>>REGINA: There are
no paying jobs even--
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
>>REGINA: --waiting for them.
So it's really a
blessing, in one way,
to be so free of those
obligations to plug in.
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
And then what I found with
Gebser's work, which gave me
this big answer, was
then the next phase
of our consciousness, it
starts around 10,000 years ago
with the Neolithic mind.
And so in my case,
I've also written
a book called
"Catastrophobia," which
is now retitled "Awakening
of the Planetary Mind."
And I wrote a book-- it was
published back in 2001--
which gave a
scientific explanation
of a series of
cataclysms that affected
our planet from about
maybe 13,000 years ago
until about 11,500 years ago.
And in science, this is called
the Younger Dryas period,
where we had tremendous changes
in temperature and water, sea
levels, and all
that kind of stuff.
And then it culminated 11,500
years ago with some kind
of huge cataclysm
that was caused
by some sort of cosmic agency.
I happen to think it was
fragments of a supernova.
Some people think
it was a comet.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: But the
most important thing
is we know that our species
went through mind-numbing,
mind-boggling cataclysmic living
on this planet for around 1,500
to 2,000 years.
So in my own work, what I
see has happened with that is
we became, at that point, a
multi-traumatized species.
So Jean Gebser
doesn't get into this.
He just gets into the shift.
What he found was in
the Neolithic mind,
what happened is we developed
magical consciousness.
And this is something,
again, the Millennials
will really, like, resonate with
because magical consciousness
involves realizing that you're
separate from the universe.
And then that first stage
of separation of ourselves
from being just
immersed in the universe
was to try to control it.
So we created spells.
We created all these magical
techniques and meditations
and all that to control the
basically overwhelming nature
of nature itself.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: Because
nature is overwhelming.
>>REGINA: Right.
Now, I'd like to go back a
bit to when we were talking
about the Paleolithic period,
because some of these values
are also rising to
the surface again now.
And let's talk about that.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
So it's really
interesting to watch
the rise in these ancient
values with Paleolithic diets,
with people going back
to really attempting
to be fused with nature.
Another thing about
the Paleolithic mind
that's really interesting
to me is it was global.
We had global consciousness,
Regina, 100,000 years ago,
50,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: When you say
global consciousness,
how do you mean that,
in what context?
>>HAND CLOW: Well,
it's something
I've tuned in for
years and years,
and you go hang out at sacred
sites and stone circles
and some of the remnants.
Now the stone circles
are actually Neolithic.
But what was happening
during the Neolithic period,
like we do now, people were
still saving technologies
from previous ages.
We could see a
whole lot of stuff
was destroyed, 11,000,
12,000 years ago.
So we always have
that dichotomy point
in consciousness, which is a
real thing to make the bridge.
But the important thing
is, if you go back
into the Paleolithic mind and
Paleolithic consciousness,
the people who lived in that
world, which, after all, was
us, that was just us before,
we knew our whole environment.
People understood the
river systems, the oceans.
They understood consciousness
at tremendous distances.
They worked with
patterns in the sky,
like lunar patterns
and stellar patterns,
in order to be connected
with each other.
And I honestly believe that we
once were globally connected.
And I think that this is coming
back because of computerization
and the web.
In other words, I
think we're going back
into being globally connected.
>>REGINA: Well, that's
what it seems to me,
is this is just a midway
step to going back
into connected
native consciousness.
And are you saying, much
as the Aboriginal people
around the world have done
within their own tribes
and themselves over
distances, that all
of these different
tribes, at one time,
could connect with each other
in the same mental planes?
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
And thank you for going to the
really old indigenous people,
like the San of South Africa
or the people of the Andaman
Islands in Indonesia.
Because fortunately, as
we've been-- now see,
where are we now?
We've been waking up
intellectually, especially
the last couple hundred years.
So as we've been waking
up intellectually,
we've also been studying all
the people on the planet.
And fortunately, there
were enough original people
left on the planet so
that anthropologists
were really able to
study their consciousness
and their ways of life.
And when you get back into
studying the really, really
old indigenous
people on the planet,
like Australia, what
you find is that a guy
on one side of Australia
knows exactly what's going on
with the guy on the
other side of Australia
because they were able to
read the signals of nature.
All the signals that link us
from a global, cosmological
perspective are there.
It's only a matter of
whether you read them or not.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Because here you're
mentioning with the rise
of intellectualism in the
last couple hundred years,
but at the same time
we really knocked out
the use of our perceptive
abilities almost simultaneous
to that.
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
And yet, what I really like
about this idea is that if we
go back into the beginning
of 100,000 years ago, then up
to 10,000 years where we
became magical, then around
5,000 years ago, we developed
a mythical sense of ourselves.
And once we had a mystical
sense of ourselves as a species,
then what happened
was that we had
a sense of storytelling and
time traveling through time.
So if you look at each
one of these stages,
even though it may look
like the Paleolithic one was
the best, in fact,
each one of them
is an advancement
in consciousness.
And I really believe
that we're on the verge
of, like, you could say, the
fourth or fifth mutation.
I didn't actually count them up.
But one of them is 100,000 years
ago, then 10,000 years ago,
then 5,000 years ago.
Then during the
Renaissance, there
was a very significant
mutation, where
we became very, very
developed intellectually
and artistically.
And now we're right in the
middle of another mutation.
And the reason this
model is so exciting--
his book is called
"Ever-Present Origin"--
he was working with the idea
that all of these things
are inherent within us and
within the planet itself.
And that each stage of it
is going to come forward
in its natural time.
And that's where
we are right now.
But when it happens,
it's chaotic.
>>REGINA: It is.
But it's interesting to
hear that you would say,
and he would say
in his philosophy,
that this is an
organic rolling out.
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
>>REGINA: Because everything
feels so completely contrived
and controlled and
manipulated at this time
that an organic
roll out isn't what
we're feeling in this time
of chaos, as you said.
You know what I'd like to
do is take the story back,
if you're going
back 100,000 years,
and let's go back into
the Atlantean times.
Because people have different
perceptions about what
society and civilization
was like at that time,
and "Paleolithic"
wouldn't be the first word
that would come up.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah, yeah.
Well, if we go back in--
in order to do this, we've got
to go before the cataclysm.
Because the only way--
>>REGINA: Yeah, way back.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
The only way we can get any
sense of what was going on
is before the
cataclysm occurred.
And so the best culture that
we have right now-- now see,
we're in the middle of
this amazing awakening.
Like right now, our
understanding of ancient people
is now moving back
very successfully,
back before 12,000, 13,000
years ago, back 17,000,
18,000 years ago.
And so if we go back into this
period from 20,000 years ago
to 11,500 years
ago, which is one
of the things I concentrated
on in "Catastrophobia,"
the culture that
really comes forth
is called the
Aurignacian culture.
>>REGINA: Say that again.
>>HAND CLOW: Aurignacian.
>>REGINA: OK.
And maybe explain
that for us as well.
>>HAND CLOW: A-U-R-I-G--
Aurignacian culture, right.
And much more
information is really
coming in about this
culture at this point.
And the first thing that
caught everybody's attention
is that they have these
beautiful points that we
call Clovis points, but they're
actually not this other.
But you know those
beautiful points that people
made for hunting and all that?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: The
Aurignacian people
made them all out of gemstones.
And they had carnelian
points and beautiful--
I'm trying to think of some of
the other semiprecious stones--
agates and all
this kind of stuff.
And you see their
technology and you go like,
these people were--
>>REGINA: What time period
was this we're looking at?
>>HAND CLOW: The Aurignacian
culture is about 25,000 years
ago till about 17--
no, actually it goes up
to about 12,000 years ago.
Because we have this
site called Gobekli Tepe.
>>REGINA: Yes, I was
going to mention that.
>>HAND CLOW: And
we now have a site
that goes back 12,000 years.
And I think, and Andrew Collins,
one of the other researchers,
we think that the Aurignacian
culture built that probably.
We think that's
the only culture--
>>REGINA: That's
the remnant of it.
>>HAND CLOW: --on
the planet that
could have built that site.
But if you see the
pictures of Gobekli Tepe
and you study the site,
it's a very advanced site.
But the advancement
is completely
different than our
technological advancement.
>>REGINA: That's what's
fascinating, too.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Talk about
that a little bit
and also Andrew's
point of view on that.
Because we tend to think of
technological advancement
more as silicon-based.
Something's going to
serve as a slave to us.
What was advancement
in these times?
>>HAND CLOW: Well, if you go
back to the Atlantean issue,
what most people
do is they project
a modern technological
mind on it.
And so they see it as this
technological civilization
that blew up in some kind
of great big explosion.
But if you can take
away your modern mindset
and if you could go back
into those times looking
at it from the perspective
of those times,
that's where you can really
see what was going on.
>>REGINA: Well, you
did these regressions.
And I've done regressions
back into that period, too.
And I'd like to hear
what you were seeing.
And I may add a thing
or two, but not much.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
So I did 100 regressions,
and 5 or 10 of them
were back 50,000, 80,000,
100,000 years ago.
And then I also
do a technique now
for recovering consciousness
called ecstatic trance,
as you know.
So as far as the
regressions are concerned,
I simply time travel
back through that period.
And I have a real solid sense of
what their technology was like,
and it--
>>REGINA: Tell us about it.
>>HAND CLOW: Well, it involves--
OK, it involves
knowing the planet
as a system that has
ley lines and vortexes,
and these are energy lines
running throughout the planet.
And at various
points on the planet,
people have created sacred
sites in the same place
over and over and over again,
because at certain places
on the planet special
energy accumulates.
And then you have to
ask yourself, well,
what do you do with that energy?
Well, that's where alchemy
of nine dimensions comes in.
Because if we go back into
the Paleolithic consciousness
I believe that the people
were nine dimensional.
And that's my own model,
which involves some very high
spiritual states.
But more importantly maybe
than the high spiritual states
is they were in touch with
the center of the earth.
They were in touch with
the realm below us,
which is the Telluric realm.
And because of that they were
able to utilize the energy
of the planet itself.
This planet has tremendous
energy and consciousness.
So if we go back to the
people of that time,
they were working with energy
I think much more profoundly
than we are now.
Much more profoundly.
>>REGINA: I believe so.
I know the times
that I dipped back
into that time in past
life regressions years ago,
there was an absence of
that noise of electricity
as we know it.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It didn't
exist in that way.
Yet, the efficiency of being
able to light, right down
to being able to light
dark side of the darker
side of the mountain to grow
crops more efficiently, I mean,
just abundant
produce, for example.
But none of that static
of an electrical field
that we produce now.
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
That's right.
And on that one you're
probably going back more
into the Neolithic.
But the Paleolithic
people also did
kind of more horticultural
farming and stuff like that.
But just imagine as we sit here
right now, what if we really
understood the agenda
of this planet?
Because clearly we
don't right now.
We're really far
off track right now.
>>REGINA: Or if we do,
we're not [INAUDIBLE] now.
>>HAND CLOW: We at a point
now, because of the overuse
of rational consciousness, where
we are basically destroying
the systems of the planet.
And yet, what if we could tune
into the real message coming
from the systems of the planet?
And that's what they
were able to do.
And that's what we've
been moving away from.
But instead of feeling
negative about it,
it's just that we're on
the verge of another leap.
And I think we're
going right back
to Paleolithic consciousness,
but with all of the other forms
of consciousness also existent.
So the magical consciousness
and the mythical consciousness,
and we're not going to
let go of rationalization.
We're not going
to let go of being
able to use these
wonderful brains in order
to think and to create.
But we're going to move back
into resonance with the planet
again.
And why are we going to do it?
As far as I can see
with human beings
nobody does anything unless
they're forced to do it.
And that's where
we are right now.
We're forced.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: And
even though we have
a lot of idiotic leaders
creating more systems
destroying the planet
the energy is rising
to stop it and change it.
That's what you can really
see with the millennials.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: That's
what you can really see.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's take it back then
to the last time necessity
was the mother of invention
and just total disorientation
after the catastrophe.
I know a lot of your colleagues,
I've heard their takes on it.
They're now coming
out more publicly
with the story of
11,500, 12,000 years ago
and a catastrophe, a
global catastrophe.
Deluge, deluge comes up a lot.
Let's talk about how
people, as you said,
they were using myth,
magic, and so forth
and spells, how we began
reorienting ourselves
over that period of time.
>>HAND CLOW: Well,
what happened was
once the cataclysms occurred,
we got our heads knocked off.
We really were helpless
multi-traumatized species.
Let's go back to 9000 BC.
And so at that
point, what happened
is, first of all, as always
happens with human beings,
some human beings were
in a stronger position
because maybe they were
on the top of the mountain
or whatever, and they
weren't as badly destroyed.
And other people's cultures
were very severely damaged.
And so a pattern starts
at that point of leaders
controlling followers.
And then that, of course,
goes through history
and has gotten to
be more intense.
>>REGINA: Almost out
of necessity people
are truly flailing.
>>HAND CLOW: It's important to
see that this was a necessity.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: And so
the first response
was the right response,
which was necessity.
And then what happened is human
beings being so profoundly
creative, and you know we are
a really creative species.
I mean, we're living with these
multi-dimensional frequency
ranges.
And we are capable of just
incredible creativity.
So we developed magic.
And magic was fun.
And then gradually we
started understanding how we
could control our reality more.
You know?
And then the mythic mind, of
course, is a sense of story
and a sense of time.
But then what happens
finally is rationalism hits.
And it really starts
with the Greeks.
The Greeks were the
first great thinkers.
And yet, if you
go back to 500 BC,
at the time of the development
of the Greek culture, what
was happening for people is
people were basically nuts.
And one of the really
good references
on this is a very
strange book called
"The Breakdown of the Bicameral
Mind" by Julian Jaynes,
which you may be
familiar with, were
basically he just
describes human beings
as being just battier beyond
belief and with Euripides
and Sophocles and all the crazy
wonderful Greek creativity.
And so what happened
is Plato comes along.
And we start getting
more logical.
We start realizing
that as fascinating
as magical consciousness is, and
as mythical consciousness is,
we've got to find out more
about who are we really.
What are we really capable of?
And I think most
importantly from the point
of view of Plato, I think Plato
was the first modern thinker
to bring up nine dimensions
of consciousness.
Because Plato was really
multi-dimensional.
And Plato realized
that we've got
to use our
consciousness logically
in order to live on this planet
with the mythical, magical,
Paleolithic potential.
Now, Regina, where
you can really
see how this is working
out is the problem
that we're having now with
so many young people going
crazy and creating violent
acts and having problems
with drugs and all that.
Because this is why
it's so important
to start to understand what's
attempting to emerge now.
And what happens is
rationalism has shut down,
especially the millennials,
to such an extreme degree
that they're just
totally reactionary.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: But they're right.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: They're right.
Because what's it going
to take to break this?
This is the problem when
you get to this mutation
stage, this change stage.
It's so difficult to
get people to throw out
their old way of doing things.
Even if they know
absolutely what
they're doing is destructive,
they still keep on going.
American politics right
now is the best example
I could come up
with of that issue.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
As you're talking, I'm thinking
that the mythical magical mind
more closely emulated the direct
experience that people once
had with the earth.
Right?
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so that
was the development
as a substitute for that
direct experience of Earth.
>>HAND CLOW: And then also,
another interesting thing
about the magical mind is-- in
relationship to Donald Trump,
I find this really interesting--
is the magical mind
was developing in the
middle of this period
when we were so
super traumatized.
And so people were trying
to deal with problems
by creating spells and
creating ideas in order to get
people to just do things.
And Trump is a magician.
>>REGINA: Yes, I see
what you're saying.
>>HAND CLOW: And the reason that
this concept is so important
is that people, all those
people who are following Trump
right now, need to take
a serious look at what
they're actually following.
No, listen, it's not
just Trump followers.
It's all of us have to look at
everything that we're actually
following right now.
But that's an
especially good example.
Because, see, these
mentalities still exist.
They don't go away when it
changes to the next stage.
They change, but
they're still there.
>>REGINA: And the thing is
you were talking about control
a moment ago once
rationalism set in,
but that lays open the
opportunity for the mind
to be almost completely co-opted
once you're disconnected
from any natural systems.
Right?
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And that's what
you were just talking about.
>>HAND CLOW: Well,
this is what's
so hard to express because
what's always hard to express
is what you're changing into.
What are we really going to
be during the Age of Aquarius?
Which, of course, is also the
next stage of this mutation.
And it has something to do with
really being in the present.
So more and more people
are finding the way
to move into the present.
And it's really
tricky for people.
The more logical a person
is, the harder it is.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: So with
each type of person
it's really hard to move
into the present time.
But at this point,
what's going to create
the next shift and the next
change is being in the present.
We've worked all of
these thousands of years
now on time, like
magical consciousness
and mystical consciousness,
the Mayan calendar,
all these different issues
of time acceleration,
which I've written a lot about.
But it's all aimed at
moving into the present.
And that's really
where we are right now.
And if we just keep
on pressing into that,
then we're going to get there.
But I have to say, the
more we move into it,
the more chaotic things.
>>REGINA: I was
going to say yes.
>>HAND CLOW: They are.
And they will.
There's no way that old
realities can change
and transform without chaos.
>>REGINA: Well, let's look
at some of the systems
that are being challenged.
First of all, how did
organized religion
factor into all of
these systems of control
after the disorientation
and the catastrophe?
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
Organized religion at this point
is a really sick situation.
>>REGINA: And we know you're
writing about that at length
in your trilogy.
>>HAND CLOW: Yes.
That's what I'm working on in my
trilogy is organized religion.
And some of my
fans don't like it.
But it's time to wake
up at this point.
Because we're all falling
into a kind of habit
of just not thinking some
of these things through.
And at this point with the
new paradigm researchers,
we know a whole
lot of new things,
for instance, about
Jesus being married
to Mary Magdalene and all that
stuff that we could go into.
But what's important
is to understand
what organized religion did,
because it's really insidious.
What happened with
organized religions
is that during this
period of recovering
from being a
multi-traumatized species
and starting to get ourselves
back together, what happened
was some of the people who
had the power and the ability
to function, because a lot
of people were just flat.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: So the people who
had the power and the ability
to function pretty soon they
discovered that if you just
get people to believe in
something, like some god
or whatever, then they'll
behave themselves.
And you can get them all to work
for you, or go to the church
that you build to
make money off of,
or whatever you want to create.
And so organized
religion came for us,
as far as I'm concerned,
as a very insidious element
in the working
out of the leaders
and the people in control.
Because there's always
going to be leaders.
And there's always going
to be people in control.
But I don't see why god has to
be used as a device by them.
Now, I'm very spiritual, and
I'm actually very religious.
But what I believe in
and what I'm in contact
doesn't have anything to
do with organized religion.
Because organized
religion is a program
that's set up to control
me and everybody else.
And I don't want
to be controlled.
>>REGINA: Well let's talk
about that, the age of Pisces.
You mentioned it earlier.
We came out of the love of
war in Aries and a love of war
in the name of god
in the age of Pisces.
Was there a more holistic
possibility of what
that age could have looked like?
>>HAND CLOW: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about that.
>>HAND CLOW: There was.
There was.
And I look at it in terms of
what Jesus came to the planet
to create.
And first of all,
when an age starts,
it usually doesn't culminate
until the end of the age.
And so I actually
think we're at a point
now of really understanding
who this person was.
And the information
that's coming in
is just mind boggling.
For instance,
archaeologists have
found the tomb in Jerusalem
that Jesus and his family
were buried in.
>>REGINA: That has a
lot of implications.
>>HAND CLOW: So the
Resurrection wasn't even true.
>>REGINA: No Resurrection.
Yeah.
>>HAND CLOW: So you
don't have to believe
that Jesus was some guy who
had to fly up in the sky.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: Jesus
can be a guy who
was a great father
or a great husband,
a great teacher, a great person.
But he made a tremendous
impact on the age of Pisces
because he came in to bring
in the Piscean age, which
is supposed to be an age of
learning how to live with love
and compassion.
So all the way through
to Piscean age,
we've been moving
further and further
and getting closer
and closer to moving
into compassion and love.
If I was going to use a
description for this mutation
that we're running
into, I think what's
finally going to happen is
people are just going to give
into love and compassion.
And I think you can see that
with the refugee situation,
for example.
I mean, what's going on
with the refugee situation
in Europe is absolutely
unparalleled.
It's on the scale of
things that happened
during the cataclysm
12,000 years ago,
on the scale of
what was going on
during the first and
second World War.
And as we all know,
many, many people
are doing everything they can
to not deal with the refugees.
But there's a whole
lot of other people
who are taking them in and
helping them and governments.
And how would you like
it if you looked in Syria
and your town got bombed?
These people have to leave.
And why are they leaving?
They're leaving because of
what Western powers created
in the Middle East.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HAND CLOW: You know?
>>REGINA: We ignore
that conveniently.
>>HAND CLOW: But
what's happening
to it is that stage by
stage as the different parts
of this unfold is
people are being forced
to become loving and
compassionate because nothing
else is going to work.
That's what we're
going to have to do.
>>REGINA: Well, you also
say that this change in ages
and this particular
period of time
brings a state of
absolute exhaustion.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And let's talk about
the implications of exhaustion
on every level.
>>HAND CLOW: Of course,
it brings exhaustion.
Because so many of the old
systems are getting tanked--
patriarchal systems, economic
systems, political systems.
>>REGINA: Religious structures.
>>HAND CLOW: And so people
are exhausted because you
don't know where to turn.
You don't know what's
going to happen next.
And you really don't know.
Well, I don't know.
And you don't know.
But I know that we're
moving towards something
very positive.
So if I can, Regina,
I'd like to go back
to my struggle with
Jean Gebser, and what
I'm attempting to
describe, is usually
I can't figure
anything out unless I
have a great image for it.
So the image that kept
coming forth for me
in order to understand
this 100,000
years of mutational
growth and development
is the image of the great
tree of life in "Avatar."
And that image in Avatar
moved me so strongly.
And so then I started
to realize, well, hey,
the Ninth Pleiadian
nine- dimensional system
is like the tree
of life with coming
from the earth in
the Greek trunk
and the fanning out of
the energy in the higher
dimensions.
And so for me, if I hold this
sense of that great tree,
and even though they cut
it down in the movie,
because that's exactly
how it would have gone.
A whole lot of great trees
of life have been cut down.
But they loved that
tree because it
was an image of the
tree of life that's
actually in the universe.
And did you know
that there's a shape
of a tree of life in the--
>>REGINA: No, I did not.
>>HAND CLOW: --cosmos itself?
Carl Calleman has
discovered this.
>>REGINA: Is this a
recent discovery of his?
>>HAND CLOW: Not too recent.
I forget the name of
that map, that big oval
map that they have of
the whole universe.
But the tree of life
is actually a form
that exists right within
the universe itself.
And it's deep, deep, deep
in our consciousness.
And what it does
for the universe,
and what it does for us,
is it creates an ever
ongoing tendency to
draw the energy of
and to mutate and to develop
higher and higher levels,
or I should say--
I don't like the word higher
sometimes-- more complex levels
of consciousness.
And so one of the
things that confuses us
about what's going on
and how to handle things
is we think of space and
time as being limited.
But space and time are
actually not limited.
And frequencies are
not limited either.
So like right now we feel
like this planet is all
filled up with garbage and it's
going to overwhelm everything.
But what's actually happening
is a mutation is going on.
And one of the things
that I find that helps
is that sense of that power
moving through the tree.
It just helps me.
When I see things in
really bad condition,
I just keep on holding onto that
image of that powerful tree.
>>REGINA: Well, going back
to what we just talked
about a moment ago,
for those who are not
holding onto it
right now and just
feeling that exhaustion
and hopelessness even,
that that's actually
seems to me what's
required to move into the
state of love and compassion
that you're speaking about.
Where there's so little to
hang onto of the familiar
that you just have
to give it up.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah, you're right.
And you immediately
flip my mind.
I'm, of course, part
Cherokee and indigenous,
and I've had a lot of ceremonial
experience in my life.
And with the best
ceremonial work that we do,
we go deliberately into
states of exhaustion.
We go into fasting
and not sleeping
and all kinds of
different techniques
for inducing a
state of exhaustion.
Because when we become
exhausted, we surrender.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HAND CLOW: You know?
And that's where
that left brain,
that rational mind is
holding on so tightly.
And the best thing--
I hate to keep saying Trump
is a good image for things--
but a writer has
already written a book
about how he's sleep-deprived.
I don't know if you
heard about that.
But a writer wrote a
whole book about how
he's totally sleep-deprived.
He goes to sleep for
like three hours a night.
And he's on his whatever he's
on in the middle of the night.
And I watch him
because I see him
as a totally exhausted person
on the verge of surrender.
So I think he's carrying
that archetype in kind
of an interesting way.
>>REGINA: So now let's take
the last part of the show
and start talking about
how we begin moving forward
if it's our charge to
begin merging again
with the intelligence of nature.
>>HAND CLOW: That's right.
>>REGINA: Let's
not just leave it
to the millennials
to figure it out.
>>HAND CLOW: Right.
Exactly.
>>REGINA: What is it
we need to begin doing?
>>HAND CLOW: I love that.
And I think you can imagine how
busy I am because right now I'm
writing the second
book in a trilogy.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: And I'm
a very busy person.
And I'm teaching
ecstatic trance.
I'm a teacher for the
Cuyamungue Institute.
And ecstatic trance is,
as far as I'm concerned,
the most profound way to
return to nature that we have.
>>REGINA: Talk about
ecstatic trance for a moment.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
And do we have a few minutes?
>>REGINA: Yes, we do.
>>HAND CLOW: Because the
reason ecstatic trance--
OK.
First of all,
ecstatic trance was
discovered by Dr. Felicitas
Goodman when she was
teaching at Denison College.
And it's a long story, but
she basically discovered that
by holding certain
postures, that when
your body is in a
certain posture,
and you're using
rattling or drumming
to go to an altered state,
according to that posture,
you go into a specific
state of consciousness.
Now, she was a cross-cultural
anthropologist.
And she had studied
all the artifacts
that we have on the planet.
And if you start studying
all the artifacts
that we have on this planet in
different parts of the world,
you start studying them
really carefully, many of them
are posture instructions.
In other words, many of
them are like figurines
that have a person standing
in a certain posture.
And so what she discovered
was she discovered
that when you assume that
posture in the modern era,
and if you do it tomorrow,
this is what happens,
you go into a specific
state of consciousness.
Maybe you are going
to do divination.
Maybe you're going to
be working with healing.
Maybe you're going
to be traveling
into the upper or
the lower world
in order to access information.
But here's the
critical issue, Regina,
these postures go through the
whole 100,000 year period.
>>REGINA: What do
you mean by that?
>>HAND CLOW: What I mean is
the figurines that we have,
the oldest ones that we have
right now go back around, I
think the oldest one right
now is 57,000 years ago.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HAND CLOW: And so, therefore,
when you get into this 100,000
year issue, we don't have much
data from 100 to 60,000 years
ago.
And then starting
around 60,000 years ago,
we start building up a databank.
And so what Felicitas
discovered is
that these postures
were being done
during the Paleolithic age,
during the Neolithic age,
and during the
mystical magical ages.
And they still work now.
>>REGINA: Are these like
recognizable yoga type
postures?
>>HAND CLOW:
Fortunately, there's
lots of books about them.
And it depends upon
you have your hand
in a certain position, your
leg in a certain position.
And people who are going to
want to look into that they're
going to have to get one of the
books about ecstatic trance.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HAND CLOW: But
what's important
about it is when you go
use one of the postures,
and you go into an
ecstatic trance,
you are at one with nature.
And I've been a student
of this for 25 years.
And I've been teaching
it when I had time.
But I didn't get it
until about a year ago
that this is the key to go
into oneness with nature.
And so what I was
saying is it doesn't
have to be just the
Paleolithic people.
We actually have--
it's literally
like a key that unlocks a door.
And what happens for people
who practice ecstatic trance
is they start working with
nature in order to heal
and in order to
change their lives.
They start improving
their gardening.
their health.
They start improving
their eating patterns.
their family life.
Because when you
use these postures,
these postures give
you the information
that actually comes
from the earth
and actually comes
from mother nature.
And so I feel so
strongly about this
that I'm teaching it even
though I don't have time.
And fortunately, we
have an institute.
And we've developed a lot of
teachers around the world.
So that at this point
for people to want
to take classes in
all that it's getting
to be easier and easier.
Dr. Goodman discovered
this in 1977.
And so then she started
the Institute right away.
And she's not with us anymore.
She was my teacher.
She was wonderful.
But people are going to
be able to study this.
And you also can buy the books
and just do it on your own.
But it's more
powerful in a group.
Very much like
indigenous people,
people work with
medicine ways in groups
because it's always
more powerful
when people come together--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HAND CLOW: --than it is
when you do it by yourself.
>>REGINA: Well,
even ecstatic dance
takes you to similar
places, not quite as deep
because you're not in
a quiet body state,
but does open up those
doorways as well.
>>HAND CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: You know?
So let's talk a
little bit, before we
wrap up now, about the hope
in this configuration in terms
of what's possible at our
pathway back to peace.
>>HAND CLOW: Well,
I'm an astrologer.
And the United
States is coming up
to its Pluto return, which means
that when the United States was
formulated Pluto was
in a certain location.
So one of the reasons--
I could sit here and say why do
we talk about the United States
all the time?
You know, I mean, I'm Canadian,
and then there's Europeans too.
But the reason everybody
talks about the United States
and focuses on it so much is
because people sense the Pluto
return.
And when a Pluto return occurs
for a country, what happens
is the country goes through
a complete transformation
and a complete purging.
And so I would
have to say that I
think it's going to be
a very, very intense
and probably there's going
to be a lot of violence.
But you know, there already
is a lot of violence.
>>REGINA: As always, the time
has just flown literally.
And we're going to come
back a little later for part
two of our
conversation about 4D,
the Annunaki, and their effect
in for the dimensional effect
into the third dimension.
>>HAND CLOW: OK.
>>REGINA: OK.
Thanks so much, Barbara.
>>HAND CLOW: Thank you, Regina.
[THEME MUSIC]